---
title: "Metal3 Introduces Pivoting"
date: 2021-05-05
draft: false
categories: ["metal3", "baremetal", "Pivoting", "Move"]
author: Kashif Nizam Khan
---

Metal3 project has introduced pivoting in its CI workflow. The motivation for
pivoting is to move all the objects from the ephemeral/management
cluster to a target cluster. This blog post will briefly introduce the concept
of pivoting and the impact it has on the overall CI workflow. For the rest of
this blog, we refer ephemeral/management cluster as ephemeral cluster.

## What is Pivoting?

In the context of Metal3 Provider, Pivoting is the process of moving
Cluster-API and Metal3 objects from the ephemeral k8s cluster to a target
cluster. In Metal3, this process is performed using the
[clusterctl](https://cluster-api.sigs.k8s.io/clusterctl/overview.html) tool
provided by Cluster-API. clusterctl recognizes pivoting as move. During the
pivot process clusterctl pauses any reconciliation of Cluster-API objects and
this gets propagated to Cluster-api-provider-metal3 (CAPM3) objects as well.
Once all the objects are paused, the objects are created on the other side on
the target cluster and deleted from the ephemeral cluster.

## Prerequisites

Prior to the actual pivot process, target cluster should already have the
provider components, ironic containers and CNI installed and running. To perform
pivot outside metal3-dev-env, specifically the following points need to be
addressed:

* clusterctl is used to initialize both the ephemeral and target cluster.
* BMH objects have correct status annotation.
* Maintain connectivity towards provisioning network.
* Baremetal Operator(BMO) is deployed as part of CAPM3.
* Objects should have a proper owner reference chain.

For a detailed explanation of the above mentioned prerequisites please read the
[pivoting documentation](https://github.com/metal3-io/metal3-docs/blob/master/docs/move.md).  

## Pivoting workflow in CI

The Metal3 CI currently includes the pivoting as part of the deployment
process both for Ubuntu and CentOS based jobs. This essentially means all
the PRs that go in, are tested through the pivoting workflow. Here is the
CI deployment workflow:

* `make` the [metal3-dev-env](https://github.com/metal3-io/metal3-dev-env.git).
It gives us the ephemeral cluster with all the  necessary controllers running
within it. The corresponding metal3-dev-env command is `make`
* `provision` target cluster. For a normal integration tests, this step deploys
a control-plane node and a worker in the target cluster. For, `feature-test`
and `feature-test-upgrade` the provision step deploys three control-planes and a
worker. The corresponding metal3-dev-env commands are (normal integration test
  workflow):

```
./scripts/provision/cluster.sh
./scripts/provision/controlplane.sh
./scripts/provision/worker.sh
```

* Initialize the provider components on the target cluster. This installs all
the controllers and associated components related to cluster-api ,
cluster-api-provider-metal3, baremetal-operator and ironic. Since it is
necessary to have only one set of ironic deployment/containers in the picture,
this step also deletes the ironic deployment/containers from
ephemeral cluster.
* `Move` all the objects from ephemeral to target cluster.
* Check the status of the objects to verify whether the objects are being
reconciled correctly by the controllers in the target cluster. This step
verifies and finalizes the pivoting process. The corresponding metal3-dev-env
command that performs this and the previous two steps is :

```
./scripts/feature_tests/pivoting/pivot.sh
```

* `Move` the objects back to the ephemeral cluster. This step also
removes the ironic deployment from target cluster and reinstates the
ironic deployment/containers in the ephemeral cluster. Since we do
not delete the provider components in the ephemeral cluster,
installing them again is not necessary. The corresponding metal3-dev-env command
 that performs this step is :

```
./scripts/feature_tests/pivoting/repivot.sh
```

* `De-provision` the BMHs and delete the target cluster. The corresponding
metal3-dev-env commands to deprovision worker, controlplane and cluster is as
follows:

```
./scripts/deprovision/worker.sh
./scripts/deprovision/controlplane.sh
./scripts/deprovision/cluster.sh
```

Note that, if we deprovision cluster, that would deprovision worker and
controlplane automatically.

## Pivoting in Metal3

The pivot process described above is realized in `ansible` scripts
[move.yml](https://github.com/metal3-io/metal3-dev-env/blob/master/vm-setup/roles/v1aX_integration_test/tasks/move.yml)
and [move_back.yml](https://github.com/metal3-io/metal3-dev-env/blob/master/vm-setup/roles/v1aX_integration_test/tasks/move_back.yml). Under the hood, pivoting uses the
`move` command from [clusterctl](https://cluster-api.sigs.k8s.io/clusterctl/commands/move.html)
provided by Cluster-API.

As stated earlier, all the PRs that go in to any Metal3 repository where the
integration tests are run, the code change introduced in the PR is verified with
pivoting also in the integration tests now. Moreover, the upgrade workflow in
Metal3 performs all the upgrade operations in Metal3 after the pivoting to the
target cluster.
